Why Is Tunisia’s Unemployment So High? Evidence From Policy Factors
IMF Working Papers
Why Is Tunisia’s Unemployment So High? Evidence From Policy Factors
By
Aymen Belgacem,
Jérôme Vacher
October 27, 2023
Download PDF
More Formats on IMF eLibrary
Order a Print Copy
Create Citation
Share
Create Citation
More formats on IMF eLibrary
Order a Print Copy
Preview Citation
Copy
Format: Chicago
Aymen Belgacem, and Jérôme Vacher. "Why Is Tunisia’s Unemployment So High? Evidence From Policy Factors",
IMF Working Papers
2023, 219 (2023), accessed August 12, 2025,
https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400257025.001
Export Citation
.ris
.bib
.enw
Disclaimer:
IMF Working Papers describe research in progress by the author(s) and are published to elicit comments and to encourage debate. The views expressed in IMF Working Papers are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF management.
Summary
Tunisia has one of the highest unemployment rates within the Middle East and Central Asia. We look at the extent to which institutional factors explain those high unemployment levels. We also assess unemployment cyclicality, by looking at the determinants of labor market sensitivity to the output gap. We find that during the last decade the deterioration of institutional factors that affect labor demand explain not only about a quarter of the unemployment rate increase in Tunisia, but also Tunisia’s excess sensitivity of unemployment to the output gap. Our results suggest that an improved business environment and product market competition, increased labor market flexibility as well as reduced financial constraints and informality would help reduce Tunisia’s unemployment.
Subject:
Employment protection,
Labor,
Labor market regulations,
Labor markets,
Unemployment,
Unemployment rate
Keywords:
Employment protection,
Global,
Labor Market,
Labor market regulations,
Labor market sensitivity,
Labor markets,
Middle East and Central Asia,
North Africa,
Okun's coefficient,
Product market regulation,
Sensitivity to the output gap,
Tunisia,
Tunisia's unemployment,
Unemployment,
Unemployment cyclicality,
Unemployment rate
Publication Details
You May Also Be Interested In...
Economic Tectonics: A Closer Look at Structural Change and Productivity Trends in the U.S. Economy
August 8, 2025
Potential Growth and Productivity in the Caribbean
August 8, 2025
Bolstering Social Protection and Human Capital to Promote Inclusive Growth: Guinea-Bissau
August 1, 2025
Options for Strengthening Ireland’s Fiscal Framework
July 25, 2025
Share Feedback