World Bank Approves US$100 Million Project to Strengthen Higher Education and Boost Employability in Tunisia
This page in:
English
This page in:
English
PRESS RELEASE
February 28, 2025
World Bank Approves US$100 Million Project to Strengthen Higher Education and Boost Employability in Tunisia
TUNIS, February 28, 2025 —
The World Bank’s Board of Directors approved a US$100 million project yesterday aimed at improving students' employability and strengthening the quality and governance of higher education and scientific research institutions. This project is designed to equip students with the skills and knowledge required by the labor market while also supporting ongoing reforms to enhance university management and strengthen links with industry.
Tunisia has made significant strides in enhancing the quality and relevance of higher education, aligning it with the needs of productive sectors to boost graduate employability. Reforms have aimed to modernize curricula, expand access to in-demand fields, and strengthen connections between universities and employers. At the same time, challenges persist, particularly youth unemployment and transition duration to the job market, exacerbated by a private sector that struggles to create sufficient high-skilled job opportunities. Structural barriers, including skills mismatches and gaps in work-based learning, further hinder employment prospects.
In this context, effectively navigating global megatrends, such as digitalization and climate change, requires sustained investment in green skills, digital competencies, and health education. These areas are critical to equipping graduates with the skills needed for future economic opportunities and ensuring competitiveness in a rapidly evolving job market.
To address these challenges,
the Strengthening Tertiary Education for Employability, Innovation and Resilience (STEEIR) project
focuses on two key components. The first enhances degree programs by improving quality, relevance, and access in high-demand fields, modernizing campuses, and fostering employer partnerships for enhanced employability. The second component strengthens university governance through system improvements, digital transformation, and quality assurance, ensuring a solid foundation for success.
“Enhancing the partnership between higher education and the private sector is essential for Tunisia’s economic growth and creating sustainable job opportunities, particularly for youth and women,”
said
Alexandre Arrobbio, World Bank Country Manager for Tunisia
.
“The World Bank remains committed to supporting Tunisia’s investment in Human Capital, which is key to empowering individuals and helping them contribute to the economy. Reforming higher education will ensure that students gain the skills needed to thrive in a changing labor market.”
The STEEIR project draws on the success of
the Tertiary Education for Employability Project (PromESsE)
to further enhance student employability and strengthen higher education management. By its completion on December 31, 2024, PromESsE had benefited over 22,000 students by introducing new degree programs, certifications, and career centers while securing international accreditations for four medical and engineering schools.
"The STEEIR project will build upon these accomplishments, further aligning higher education with the evolving needs of the labor market, aiming for 85 accredited programs and supporting at least 145,000 students and faculty members by 2030,"
said
Himdat Bayusuf, Senior Education Specialist and Task Team Leader for the project
.
Contacts
In Washington
Nicholas Keyes
nkeyes@worldbankgroup.org
In Tunis
Riadh Ammari
rammari@worldbankgroup.org
RELATED
Blogs
WHAT'S NEW
This site uses cookies to optimize functionality and give you the best possible experience. If you continue to navigate this website beyond this page, cookies will be placed on your browser. To learn more about cookies,
click here
.
×