Tunisia : Development news, research, data | World Bank
This page in:
English
This page in:
English
The World Bank in Tunisia
The World Bank in Tunisia is supporting sustainable growth for the people of Tunisia, energy transition, water management, human capital development & social resilience, and quality jobs.
Featured
Tunisia  At-A-Glance
The Tunisian government is prioritizing mitigating the impacts of climate change, in particular the energy transition and the water question, alongside with fostering human development and achieving a stronger, more sustainable economy. The World Bank in Tunisia is supporting the Government in advancing these priorities through multiple programs, with an immediate focus on energy transition, water management, and human capital.
Overview
Data
Project
The Tunisia-Italy interconnector project (ELMED)
The landmark ELMED project will link energy grids between Tunisia and Europe and support renewable energy trade essential to Tunisia's sustainable development and climate change strategy.
All projects
Research
View All Research
Blogs
View All Blogs
View All Blogs
Experts
Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye
World Bank Country Director for the Maghreb and Malta, Middle East & North Africa, Afghanistan & Pakistan (MENAAP)
Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye
Alexandre Arrobbio
World Bank Country Manager for Tunisia, Middle East & North Africa, Afghanistan & Pakistan (MENAAP)
Alexandre Arrobbio
View All Experts
Stay Connected
News & Events
View All Multimedia
What's New
View All What's New
Latest Events
View All Events
In Depth
Stay connected, sign up for our:
World Bank Group Weekly Updates
Email Alerts on country news, projects, and research
First Name
I agree with the terms of the
Privacy Notice
and consent to my personal data being processed, to the extent necessary, to subscribe to the selected updates.
Please enter a valid email address.
Please enter a valid email address.
World Bank Group Weekly Updates
We’ve just sent you an email. Please check your inbox and confirm your email address.
World Bank Group Weekly Updates
You are already subscribed to this newsletter.
Email Alerts on country news, projects, and research
We’ve just sent you an email. Please check your inbox and confirm your email address.
Email Alerts on country news, projects, and research
You are already subscribed to this newsletter.
Work With Us In Tunisia
Additional Resources
Related
Country Office Contacts
Tunis
Riadh Ammari
Building Le Boulevard, 3rd floor, Cité les Pins, Les Berges du Lac II, 1053 Tunis
rammari@worldbankgroup.org
This site uses cookies to optimize functionality and give you the best possible experience. If you continue to navigate this website beyond this page, cookies will be placed on your browser. To learn more about cookies,
click here
.
×