IMF Staff Concludes Mission to Tunisia with Good Progress
Press Release
No. 22/267
IMF Staff Concludes Mission to Tunisia with Good Progress
July 19, 2022
End-of-Mission press releases include statements of IMF staff teams that convey preliminary findings after a visit to a country. The views expressed in this statement are those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Board. Based on the preliminary findings of this mission, staff will prepare a report that, subject to management approval, will be presented to the IMF's Executive Board for discussion and decision.
Tunis, Tunisia:
An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission led by Björn Rother visited
Tunis from July 4 to July 18 to discuss potential IMF financial support for
the authorities’ program of economic policies and reforms. At the end of
the mission, Mr. Rother issued the following statement:
“Discussions on a new Extended Fund Facility (EFF) to support the
authorities’ economic policies and reforms have been productive. They will
continue over the coming weeks towards reaching a staff-level agreement. As
is always the case, final agreement on a program arrangement would be
subject to approval of the IMF's Executive Board.
“The authorities are making important progress with their economic agenda,
coordinating well across ministries and agencies around a shared vision
that is sound. It is now critical to accelerate implementation of this
agenda.
“The Tunisian economy is suffering from the economic impact of the Ukraine
war that came as a major external shock on top of the Covid-19 pandemic.
These pressures add to the economy’s underlying structural weaknesses. The
near-term outlook is challenging, as growth will likely decelerate while
higher international prices for energy and food are adding to already high
inflation and are increasing fiscal and external deficits and debt. Urgent
measures are needed to reduce these imbalances in a socially sustainable
manner.
“IMF Staff supports the priorities of the authorities’ program of economic
policies and reforms. It is important to build on the recent progress made
to improve tax equity, expand coverage of social safety nets and increase
cash transfers, turn around loss-making public enterprises, and contain
current public expenditures. The latter will require reducing the growth of
the civil service wage bill during the years ahead and gradually phasing
out energy subsidies through regular price hikes that link domestic prices
to global prices for oil and natural gas. It is equally important to
strengthen tax equity by bringing in the informal sector into the tax net
and ensuring stronger contributions from liberal professions. As critical
will be swift progress with ongoing efforts to strengthen the social safety
net and expand its coverage to compensate for the impact of higher prices
for administered goods through cash transfers to vulnerable households and
also some relief to the middle class. The Central Bank of Tunisia has
started monetary policy tightening to protect the purchasing power of
Tunisians in the face of high and accelerating inflation. We agree that
this action should continue in the time ahead.
“We welcome the openness of the government and social partners for a
constructive dialogue on implementing a socially-conscious and
growth-friendly economic program. We hope that social partners and other
important stakeholders can unite around this effort. Broad buy-in will be
essential to accomplish the urgent task of reducing macroeconomic
imbalances, shore up stability, and support the job-creating growth that is
required to activate the substantial economic potential of Tunisia for the
benefit of all Tunisians.
“The international community will need to again play an important role in
facilitating the authorities’ program through the rapid release of
financing. This will be indispensable to ensure the success of the
authorities’ policy and reform efforts.
“The mission met with Head of Government Najla Bouden Romdhane, Minister of
Finance Sihem Boughdiri Nemsia, Minister of Economy and Planning Samir
Saïed, Minister of Social Affairs Malek Zahi, Minister of Industry, Mines
and Energy Neila Nouira Gongi, Minister of Commerce and Export Development
Fadhila Rebhi Ben Hamza, Minister of Agriculture, Hydraulic Resources and
Fishing Mahmoud Elyes Hamza, Minister of Health Ali Mrabet, Minister of
Technology and Communication Nizar Ben Neji, Minister of Transport Rabi
Majidi, Minister of Environment Leila Chikhaoui, Minister of Tourism
Mohamed Moez Belhassine, Central Bank of Tunisia Governor Marouane El
Abassi, as well as their staff. It also held discussions with the UGTT
labor union and the UTICA and CONECT employers’ federations, civil society,
development partners, and the diplomatic community. The mission would like
to thank the Tunisian authorities and all those with whom it met for their
warm welcome and the frank and productive discussions.”
IMF Communications Department
MEDIA RELATIONS
PRESS OFFICER:
Wafa Amr
Phone:
+1 202 623-7100
Email:
MEDIA@IMF.org
@IMFSpokesperson